
Lung cavities are not typically associated with community-acquired pneumonia (CAP). CAP due to P. aeruginosa is rare and even
less commonly causes necrotizing pneumonia. We report a case of P. aeruginosa CAP that progressed to necrotizing pneumonia
and was eventually fatal. Procalcitonin (PCT) has been well investigated in guiding antibiotic therapy (especially CAP) in adults. In
this case, PCT at presentation and sequentially was negative. We discuss this caveat and present hypotheses as to the sensitivity and
specificity of PCT and C-reactive protein (CRP) in these patients. To better characterize P. aeruginosa CAP, we undertook a review
of cases indexed in PubMed from 2001 to 2016 (𝑛= 9). The data reveal that risk factors for P. aeruginosa CAP include smoking,
alcohol use, obstructive lung disease, sinusitis, and hot tub use. The route of infection for P. aeruginosa CAP remains unknown. One
of the most interesting findings on reviewing cases was that P. aeruginosa CAP involves the right upper lobe in the vast majority.
We suggest that when physicians in the community see patients with distinctly upper lobe necrotizing or cavitary pneumonia, they
should consider P. aeruginosa in their differential diagnosis. Further studies are needed to clarify route of infection, role of PCT
and CRP, and optimal therapy including drug and duration.
1. Introduction
Necrotizing pneumonia refers to consolidation with multi-
ple small cavities and parenchymal necrosis. Lung cavities
have not typically been associated with community-acquired
pneumonia (CAP). They develop when bacterial lung infec-
tions progress to necrosis despite optimal medical therapy.
The pathogenesis of necrotizing pneumonia is not exactly
known but is believed to be tissue necrosis from an exuberant
inflammatory response driven by toxins produced by an
invasive pathogen and/or associated vasculitis and venous
thrombosis [1]. Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a Gram-negative
bacterium that is notorious for severe hospital- acquired
respiratory infections. Patients with serious pseudomonal
infections often have risk factors such as being immunocom-
promised or on a ventilator [2]. However, CAP due to P.
aeruginosa is rare [3] and has been infrequently known to
cause necrotizing pneumonia.
2. Case Presentation
A 63-year-old female presented to her primary care physician
with a 6-day history of fever, cough, and dyspnea. Her
cough was productive of green sputum that was occasionally
streaked with blood. She had mild chest discomfort but no
chest pain or pleurisy at that time. Review of systems was
otherwise unremarkable. Her medical history was significant
for obstructive lung disease (COPD), hypothyroidism (well
controlled), hypertension, and a long history of smoking (60
pack years). Two years ago, she had computed tomography
(CT) scanning of the chest which showed emphysematous
changes but no cavities. Despite having severe COPD, she
continued to smoke daily and consume alcohol (80 units
weekly). She used home nebulization for her COPD, generally
utilizing sterile water, but occasionally tap water. There was
no illicit drug use. She did not have any history of recent
hospitalization within the preceding 90 days.
Hindawi
Case Reports in Infectious Diseases
Volume 2017, Article ID 1717492, 5 pages
https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/1717492
2
Case Reports in Infectious Diseases
Figure 1: Chest X-ray with right upper lobe cavitating pneumonia.
On examination, the patient was not in any distress and
auscultation revealed mild wheezing. She did not want to
receive any further testing at that time and was prescribed
a 5-day course of levofloxacin 750 mg daily. Two weeks
later, the patient presented for follow-up with worsening
cough, increasing hemoptysis, and respiratory distress. On
examination, she was in moderate respiratory distress with
an oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry of 92% on room
air, but not febrile or tachycardic, with a blood pressure of
167/97 mmHg.
Chest X-ray was done revealing right upper lobe opaci-
fication with a large air-fluid level suggestive of cavitating
pneumonia (Figure 1). On admission then, leukocyte count
was normal at 7.8 × 103/mL with no left shift; procalci-
tonin (PCT) was 0.12 ng/mL and C-reactive protein (CRP)
was elevated at 143.8 mg/L. Testing for renal, thyroid, and
hepatic function and cardiac enzymes was within normal.
Autoimmune panel was unremarkable. Testing for human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), bacterial and fungal urine,
and serum antigens was all negative. CT scanning confirmed
extensive opacification nearly completely filling the right
upper lobe (Figure 2). Also new were associated cavitary
regions within the right upper lobe. The largest area of
cavitation measured 5.1 × 4.2 cm.
Two sputum cultures were collected separately and Gram
stain revealed no squamous epithelial cells, few neutrophils,
and Gram-negative rods. Within one day, both samples grew
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, which was resistant to levofloxacin
and ciprofloxacin. The patient was started on ceftazidime,
as the isolate tested susceptible to cefepime, ceftazidime,
gentamicin, piperacillin/tazobactam, and tobramycin. Two
days into inpatient stay, the patient developed a leukocytosis
of 13.1 × 103/mL with left shift. By that time, tuberculosis
had been excluded with negative sputum for acid fast bacilli,
along with a negative interferon-gamma release assay. Five
days into admission, with no improvement, the patient
underwent bronchoalveolar lavage and culture again grew P.
aeruginosa with negative tuberculosis testing. Quantitative
microbiologic analysis of the bronchoalveolar lavage was
Figure 2: CT scan of the right upper lobe.
reported at 20,000 colonies/mL. The pattern of antibacterial
susceptibility was exactly the same as that reported on
the sputum cultures. One week into admission, the patient
developed respiratory failure requiring intubation and was
admitted to intensive care. Despite prolonged treatment, the
patient died from progressive respiratory and multiorgan
failure two weeks from admission.
3. Discussion and Literature Review
3.1. Pathophysiology. As this case demonstrates, P. aeruginosa
CAP can progress to necrotizing pneumonia that can be
fatal. Generally speaking, the progression from CAP to
necrotizing pneumonia is usually rapidly progressive and
these patients tend to present shortly after in acute respiratory
distress. However, P. aeruginosa CAP appears to be an
insidious disease, which can take weeks before respiratory
decompensation. In the case above, we hypothesize that over
the initial two weeks there would have been progressive
necrosis, with coalescing of these foci into cavities which were
seen on chest imaging (Figure 2). One similar case reported
on pathologic findings from autopsy [4]; the affected lung
showed infiltration by macrophages and neutrophils, with
marked alveolar necrosis and hemorrhage. These findings
can be explained as P. aeruginosa is invasive and can cause
a thrombotic endarteritis [1].
3.2. Laboratory Investigations. CRP and more recently PCT
have entered mainstream use in helping physicians distin-
guish between bacterial and nonbacterial causes of pneu-
monia. PCT is an acute-phase hormokine released by the
parenchymal cells in patients with invasive bacterial infec-
tions [5]. PCT levels are also elevated in patients with
bacteremia [6]. Research has confirmed that PCT is part of
the complex innate immune response leading to an inflam-
matory state. Transcription and translation of PCT have
been demonstrated both in organs and in macrophages as
a result of bacterial infection and proinflammatory cytokine
release. PCT has been well investigated in guiding antibiotic
therapy by predicting the probability of a bacterial etiology
of respiratory tract infection (especially CAP) in adults. A
Case Reports in Infectious Diseases
3
Table 1: Recent cases of P. aeruginosa CAP.
Reference
Age
(yrs)
Sex
Risk factors
Location of
pneumonia
Treatment and outcome
(1) Crnich et al. [14]
40
M
Smoking, alcohol use,
emphysema, hot tub use
Right upper and
middle lobes
Amp, Cipro (6 weeks total);
recovery
(2) Patel et al. [15]
83
F
Asthma
Right upper lobe
Ceft, Cipro, Tob, Pip (34 days
total); recovery
(3) Huhulescu et al. [16]
49
F
Smoking, hot tub use
Left lung
Pip, Mox; multiorgan failure and
death
(4) Okamoto et al. [17]
39
F
Smoking, alcohol use
Right upper lobe
Ceft, Cipro, Mero, steroids,
plasmapheresis; recovery
(5) Takajo et al. [4]
50
F
—
Right upper lobe
Mero; respiratory failure and
death
(6) Fujii et al. [18]
29
M
Sinusitis
Right upper lobe
Pip, Levo, Tob, Cipro; recovery
(7) Kunimasa et al. [19]
25
M
Smoking
Right upper lobe
Amp, Mero, Levo (4 weeks);
recovery
(8) Gharabaghi et al. [20]
26
M
—
Left upper lobe
Oflox, Cipro (2 weeks); recovery
(9) Present case
63
F
Smoking, alcohol use,
emphysema
Right upper lobe
Levo, Ceftaz; multiorgan failure
and death
Amp, ampicillin; Ceft, ceftriaxone; Ceftaz, ceftazidime; Cipro, ciprofloxacin; Levo, levofloxacin; Mero, meropenem; Mox, moxifloxacin; Oflox, ofloxacin; Pip,
piperacillin; Tob, tobramycin.
PCT cut-off of 0.50 ng/mL has been recommended to rule
out bacterial infection in clinical practice [7]. Sequential PCT
levels have been advocated for use in guiding antimicrobial
therapy [5].
This data is interesting when applied to the case above.
PCT was not elevated despite the presence of necrotiz-
ing pneumonia with clinical, radiologic, and microbiologic
evidence of bacterial respiratory tract infection. Sequential
PCT levels were also repeatedly negative (<0.50 ng/mL).
One hypothesis is that the mechanisms of activating PCT
transcription were not stimulated by localized P. aeruginosa
necrotizing infection. The leukocyte count was surprisingly
normal as well, also suggesting that the infection was rela-
tively contained. Alternatively, the PCT cut-off may need to
be lowered for detection in this population.
Studies reporting on PCT in patients with complicated
parapneumonic effusions and empyema have yielded mixed
results. Among 18 patients with culture-positive empyema,
the sensitivity and specificity of PCT were 76% and 81%,
respectively [8]. This poor discriminatory performance was
even using a lower threshold of 0.19 ng/mL. In a prospective
study, Doˇgan et al. compared 33 patients with parapneumonic
effusions (including 22 empyemas) with controls (nonpara-
pneumonic effusions). Using a cut-off level of 0.105 ng/mL,
the sensitivity and specificity of PCT were 67% and 97%,
respectively [9]. This case and the evidence from these
studies demonstrate that PCT may remain low in localized
or contained pulmonary infection, even when clinically and
radiologically advanced. We suggest that despite being one of
the best biomarkers for pulmonary infection, the discrimina-
tory value of PCT in the diagnosis of localized necrotizing
or cavitary pneumonia requires further investigation. We
also hypothesize that the PCT cut-off of 0.50 ng/mL used
to discriminate bacterial pneumonia may not be reliable in
these cases to guide antibiotic therapy. Until this is clarified,
a normal leukocyte count and low PCT should not falsely
reassure the physician or patient as to the gravity of the
illness.
These are of course issues which need to be evaluated
in large scale studies. Whether these findings are dependent
on bacterial etiology also remains to be investigated. The-
ories that may explain the low sensitivity of PCT include
the absence of macrophage activation leading to TNF and
the inability of the pleura to synthesize PCT. This second
hypothesis deserves special mention as it has already been
shown that PCT levels in pleural fluid from patients with
empyema are of little discriminatory value [10].
CRP is an acute-phase protein that is synthesized by
hepatocytes. It is widely available and often used to screen for
infectious processes. It has been reported to be less sensitive
than PCT for the detection of bacterial pneumonia and
is well known to be nonspecific. However, in complicated
pneumonia and localized infection, an elevated CRP level
has been reported to have better discriminatory performance
than PCT, in both the serum and pleural fluid [10–12], there-
fore, measuring CRP in cases where cavitary or necrotizing
pneumonia is suspected to be of value.
3.3. Literature Review. Rare cases of CAP from P. aeruginosa
have been reported since the 1960s. In what we found to be
the most extensive review of P. aeruginosa CAP, Hatchette
et al. analyzed all cases indexed in PubMed from 1966 to
2000 (𝑛= 11) [13]. To better characterize P. aeruginosa CAP
and assess for any evolution in the pattern of disease, we
undertook a review of cases indexed in PubMed from 2001
to 2016 (𝑛= 9). Cases were reviewed if they involved adults
with no recent hospitalization, with positive identification of
P. aeruginosa from either the sputum or blood, and clinical
and radiologic confirmation of active pneumonia. These cases
are summarized in Table 1.
4
Case Reports in Infectious Diseases
3.4. Risk Factors. On review of the nine cases reported in
the last 15 years, patients affected continue to be middle-
aged with a mean age of 45 ± 19 years. There was no gender
predisposition with five females and four males affected. Risk
factors identified were smoking, alcohol use, and obstructive
lung disease. Less common risk factors include sinusitis and
hot tub use. The route of infection for P. aeruginosa CAP
remains unknown. One case reported direct transmission
between a mother and daughter [15], but in other cases there
was no history of ill contacts. Several cases have documented
exposure to contaminated aerosolized water [16, 21, 22]. It is
well known that P. aeruginosa can contaminate even distilled
water, persisting up to a year after inoculation in bottled water
[23].
Our patient, along with other cases reported, had emphy-
sematous lung changes. The pathophysiology behind P. aerug-
inosa CAP in patients with COPD is complex and remains to
be elucidated. While early in emphysema there is a matched
V/Q defect, over time hyperventilation develops and blood
flow decreases, leading to V/Q mismatching. Combined with
decreased mucociliary clearance from smoking, this can be
favorable to growth of aerobic bacteria. It has been shown that
a subset of patients with COPD, ranging from 4% to 15%, are
colonized with a clone of P. aeruginosa [24, 25]. This has been
likened to patterns of chronic infection resembling those
observed in cystic fibrosis [25, 26]. Persistent infections can
lead to symptomatic exacerbations via clonal transformation
to the mucoid P. aeruginosa phenotype. This phenotype was
grown in one case of P. aeruginosa CAP [20]. However, this
does not fully explain the mechanism of acute P. aeruginosa
infection in the community with resulting inflammation and
necrosis.
Patients generally presented with the nonspecific symp-
toms of cough and dyspnea, but some reported hemoptysis
and chest pain [4, 17, 19]. Similar to what Hatchette et
al. reported, on presentation there was a highly variable
leukocyte count with cases reporting low, normal, and high
levels. Perhaps reflecting the incorporation of CRP since
Hatchette et al. did their review, 4 cases reported an elevated
CRP ranging from 6.6 to 38.1 mg/L [16, 17].
3.5. Location of Pneumonia. One of the most interesting
findings reported by Hatchette et al. was that P. aeruginosa
CAP involved the right upper lobe (RUL) in two-thirds
of patients. In reviewing recent cases, this finding was
reproduced with the vast majority (7/9) involving the RUL.
Except one case which was not specified, all involved the
upper lobes. The reason why P. aeruginosa CAP appears to
have a predilection to involve the upper lobes has never been
investigated. P. aeruginosa is of course an aerobic bacterium
and it can be hypothesized that the upper lobes provide a
more favorable environment by virtue of higher ventilation to
perfusion ratios. We suggest this can be a clinical clue. When
physicians in the community see patients with a distinctly
upper lobe necrotizing or cavitary pneumonia they should
consider P. aeruginosa in the differential diagnosis in the
appropriate clinical scenario. A low index of suspicion can be
beneficial as chest radiography may lag behind clinical status
and early in the disease course necrotizing pneumonia can
appear as consolidation only, leading to an underestimation
of the degree of parenchymal destruction [1].
3.6. Prognosis and Complications. Out of the nine P. aerugi-
nosa CAP cases recently reported, three were fatal highlight-
ing the severity of this disease. Younger patients tended to do
better. In fatal cases the disease course involved development
of septic shock characterized by organ failure. Injury to the
alveolar epithelium allows the release of proinflammatory
mediators into the circulation that are primarily responsible
for septic shock [27]. In cases of recovery, complications
included parenchymal scarring and recrudescence requiring
repeated antibiotic courses. This brings up the question of
duration of treatment for P. aeruginosa CAP. In the cases
reviewed with recovery, duration of therapy varied from 2 to
6 weeks.
4. Conclusion
Although CAP due to P. aeruginosa is rare, it can cause
necrotizing pneumonia with high morbidity and mortality.
Physicians must maintain a high level of suspicion as P.
aeruginosa CAP can have an insidious course. Risk factors
identified were smoking, alcohol use, and obstructive lung
disease. Imaging can demonstrate coalescing of infectious
foci into cavities and is recommended when there is clin-
ical suspicion. However, chest radiography may lag behind
clinical status. A review of the literature suggests that when
physicians in the community see patients with a distinctly
upper lobe pneumonia they should consider P. aeruginosa in
their differential diagnosis. The biomarker PCT has been well
investigated in guiding antibiotic therapy for CAP; however,
we suggest that based on current evidence, PCT use in this
way is not reliable in management of localized necrotizing
or cavitary pneumonia. CRP appears to be more sensitive
in these cases. The duration of treatment has not been well
defined but a minimum of 2 weeks is reasonable. Further
studies are needed to clarify the route of infection, role of PCT
and CRP, and optimal therapy including drug and duration.
Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.