
Chromobacterium violaceum is a facultative anaerobic, Gram-negative rod, prevalent in tropical and subtropical regions. It enters
through the skin injury and is capable of causing severe systemic infections leading to septic shock and multiorgan failure. It has
been reported by few authors across the world but this is probably the first case of Chromobacterium violaceum isolated from wound
sepsis from Nepal. In this study, a pus sample from the infection of a prick injury in the left middle finger was collected from the
patient admitted to the intensive care unit. Bacteriological investigations of the pus sample revealed the causative organism to be
Chromobacterium violaceum. This case study indicates that Chromobacterium violaceum can act as a potential cause of wound sepsis
that may lead to the septic shock and if not treated timely, the mortality rate can be high as was in this study. Although this organism
is very rare, the infection caused requires prompt treatment to minimize the mortality rate. Therefore, we recommend the timely
diagnosis and antimicrobial therapy of this infection to combat the consequences led.
1. Introduction
Chromobacterium violaceum is a Gram-negative, rod-shaped,
motile, and facultative anaerobic bacterium that gives posi-
tive catalase and oxidase reaction. It grows readily on different
bacteriological culture media including nutrient agar (NA),
blood agar (BA), chocolate agar (CA), and Muller-Hinton
agar (MHA) at 35–37∘C [1, 2]. Chromobacterium violaceum
can be isolated from water and soil in tropical and subtropical
regions [3]. The organism rarely infects humans; yet, occa-
sionally, the organism can establish a severe systemic infec-
tion by entering the bloodstream via an open wound [4]. In
most of the cases the organism enters through the breaching
of skin, following contamination of soil or water. The effects
range from cutaneous lesion to severe sepsis and septic shock
progressing rapidly to the death due to the multiorgan failure
[5, 6]. We have reported a case of wound sepsis and septic
shock caused by Chromobacterium violaceum at Chitwan
Medical College Teaching Hospital (CMCTH), Bharatpur,
Chitwan, Nepal. Probably this is the first reported case of
Chromobacterium violaceum from Nepal.
2. Case Presentation
A 45-year-old male came to the emergency service of Chit-
wan Medical College Teaching Hospital (CMCTH), a 600-
bed referral hospital of central Nepal, at midnight (11:40 pm)
with clinical presentation of fever, burning sensation over
epigastric region, and difficulty in breathing for two days.
There was no nausea and vomiting reported together with
normal bowel and bladder. History of patient revealed prick
injury in left middle finger by unknown foreign body seven
days back. On examination the patient had blood pressure
of 100/70 mmHg, pulse rate of 100 beats per minute, and
respiratory rate of 24 breaths per minute and the patient was
anxious.
The close observation of middle finger enabled prick
injury, swollen and tense, extension to middle and proximal
Hindawi Publishing Corporation
Case Reports in Infectious Diseases
Volume 2015, Article ID 181946, 4 pages
http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2015/181946
2
Case Reports in Infectious Diseases
Table 1: Bacteriological investigations and their results.
Bacteriological parameters
Results
Gram’s stain
Plenty of pus cells and presence of Gram-negative rods
Bacterial growth on MA, BA, and CA
Round, smooth, convex, butyrous, medium size, dark violet colonies, nonlactose fermenting,
nonhemolytic, notable production of nondiffusible, dark violet metallic pigment (violacein)
in MHA
Triple sugar iron (TSI) agar
Acid production in slant
Negative
Acid production in butt
Positive
Hydrogen sulphide production
Negative
Gas production
Negative
Glucose fermentation
Positive
Lactose and/or sucrose fermentation
Negative
Alkali production in slant
Positive
Sulphide indole motility (SIM)
Motility
Positive
Hydrogen sulphide production
Negative
Indole production
Negative
Urea hydrolysis test
Negative
Citrate utilization test
Negative
Catalase test
Positive
Oxidase test
Positive
Methyl red test
Negative
Voges-Proskauer test
Negative
phalynx, collection of pus, peeling of skin, sloughing off,
presence of sinuses, and discharge of pus material. The patient
was provisionally diagnosed as a case of wound sepsis with
septic shock together with acute kidney injury (previously
called renal failure). The patient underwent pus drainage
and pus investigation for bacteriological profile (culture and
antibiotic sensitivity result) and surgical consultation.
The patient was admitted to intensive care unit (ICU) and
after 2 hours the blood pressure was remarkably decreased
and central venous pressure (CVP) line inserted, and
inotropic support (noradrenaline) was started. The antimi-
crobial regime of piperacillin/tazobactam, flucloxacillin, and
metronidazole was immediately started together with IV
fluid (6 pints of dextrose normal saline over 24 hours),
pantoprazole, and hydrocortisone.
The collected pus sample was subjected to bacteriolog-
ical investigations (Gram’s staining, culture, and sensitivity
testing). First, the pus sample was inoculated on MacConkey
agar (MA), blood agar (BA), and chocolate agar (CA) and
then Gram’s staining was performed. All the inoculated plates
were incubated at 37∘C for overnight and, the next day,
numerous growths of dark violet colonies with no hemolysis
were observed. Subculture on Muller-Hinton agar (MHA)
showed notable characteristic feature of nondiffusible, dark
violet metallic pigment production.
The growth was further carried out for biochemical
testing for catalase, oxidase, triple sugar iron (TSI) agar,
sulphide indole motility (SIM), urea hydrolysis, citrate uti-
lization, methyl red, and Voges-Proskauer and the results of
biochemical tests were described in Table 1. We felt difficulty
in interpreting the result of oxidase test because of the violet
color of colonies. However, this difficulty was overcome by
incubating the agar plate anaerobically and there was no
or minimum pigment formation as pigment production is
inhibited by anaerobic environment. After a few hours under
aerobic conditions, the colonies turned violet again.
Antibiotic susceptibility testing was performed on dark
violet colonies for a range of antimicrobials (amikacin,
gentamicin, ceftriaxone, ciprofloxacin, cotrimoxazole, piper-
acillin-tazobactam, meropenem, and amoxicillin-clavulanic
acid) on MHA and the result of susceptibility test was
interpreted according to the CLSI guidelines for non-
Enterobacteriaceae Gram-negative bacteria [7].
On admission, the hematological investigations showed
a decreased total leukocyte count with low hemoglobin
(Table 2). The blood chemistry investigations also showed
remarkable results except for random blood sugar concentra-
tion of 114.0 mg/dL (reference range 70–140 mg/dL) (Table 3).
The presence of albumin in urine routine examination
revealed the renal dysfunction whereas arterial blood gas
disclosed severe metabolic acidosis. The electrocardiogram
(ECG) of patient revealed the sinus tachycardia and chest X-
ray showed infiltrates in bilateral middle and lower zone.
The patient was subjected to debridement of abscess, the
sloughed off tissues and necrotic material were removed, and
the wound was washed with Betadine and hydrogen peroxide
and then with normal saline. Betadine packing and dressing
were applied and advised for daily dressing. Despite these
Case Reports in Infectious Diseases
3
Table 2: Hematological investigations and their results.
Parameters
Results
Reference range
Total leukocyte count
2,900/𝜇L
4,000–11,000/𝜇L
Differential leukocyte count
Neutrophils
88%
40–70%
Lymphocytes
10%
20–40%
Monocytes
01%
2–10%
Eosinophils
01%
2–6%
Basophils
00
0-1%
Platelets count
2,15,000/𝜇L
1,50,000–4,00,000/𝜇L
Hemoglobin (Hb)
9.4 gm/dL
12–18 gm/dL
Table 3: Blood chemistry investigations and their results.
Parameters
Results
Reference range
Random blood sugar
114.0 mg/dL
70–140 mg/dL
Blood urea
77.0 mg/dL
15–45 mg/dL
Creatinine
1.8 mg/dL
0.4–1.4 mg/dL
Sodium
127.0 mmol/L
135–150 mmol/L
Potassium
3.5 mmol/L
3.5–5.5 mmol/L
SGPT
537.0 IU/L
<42 IU/L
SGOT
830.0 IU/L
<37 IU/L
ALP
224.0 IU/L
64–306 IU/L
Serum amylase
18.0 IU/L
25–115 IU/L
Serum lipase
169.0 IU/L
73–393 IU/L
Troponin-I
Negative
—
vital procedures, the patient’s condition worsened and death
was declared after 21 hours of arrival to the hospital because
of septic shock with multiple organ failure. The results of
bacteriological investigation were yet to come.
The antibiotic sensitivity report revealed that the isolate
was susceptible to all subjected antimicrobials. Based on the
bacteriological findings the causative agent was identified as
Chromobacterium violaceum.
3. Discussion
Human infections caused by Chromobacterium violaceum
are uncommon as very few cases have been reported in
scientific literatures [2, 5] and we could not find any published
literature from Nepal. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first case of Chromobacterium violaceum reported from
wound sepsis from Nepal. However, few cases have been
published from India, Vietnam, Brazil, and Argentina [8–11].
Apart from the several useful compounds (for envi-
ronmental detoxification, bioprospecting, pest control, and
therapeutics) this bacterium can produce violacein, a pig-
ment that displays cytotoxic and antibacterial activity [5,
12]. The violacein production is unique to Chromobacterium
violaceum, differentiating the organism from other tropical,
soil dwelling organisms [13].
The dominant route of infection for this pathogen is
through exposure of injured skin to contaminated water or
soil, with effects ranging from cutaneous lesions and visceral
abscesses to severe sepsis, which progresses rapidly to death
[6]. One report from United States [14] and one report from
India [2] described fatality rate to be as high as 57% in each
study. In our case study, probably the pricking injury and the
entry of organism may be while working in the paddy field
filled with stagnant water contaminated with this organism.
The quick evolution of disease and the antibiotic treatment
failure result in a mortality rate of over 60% [10]. In this case
study too, the sepsis was reported which terminated in the
death of patient after 21 hours of arrival to the hospital due
to fast progression of fatal consequences of sepsis and septic
shock.
4. Conclusions
Our case report reinforces the quick and timely treatment of
infections caused by Chromobacterium violaceum. Although
this organism is very rare, the consequences developed due
to the infection of this organism can be highly fatal. Thus,
from this case study we recommend rapid diagnosis and
prompt treatment of infections caused by Chromobacterium
violaceum.
Conflict of Interests
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interests.
Authors’ Contribution
All authors read and agreed the paper.